---
title: 'Vaswani et al. (2017) - Attention is All You Need'
date: 2025-05-25
permalink: /posts/2025/05/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - ML
  - Transformer
layout: single
---

## Introduction
In ML, there are two methods of inferences: induction and transduction. Inductive learning is where the model learns a general rule $$\begin{equation*}f: X \to Y \end{equation*}$$ from training data, and then applying it to any unseen test data. Transductive learning predicts labels only for the specific test points provided at training time. The goal is to predict $$Y_{\text{test}}$$ without learning a general function $$f$$.  

Traditional sequence transduction models, such as RNN, LSTM, or GRU, receive previous output as an input. Due to their inherently sequential computation nature, these models cannot be fully parallelrised, limiting computational efficiency The authors propose a new architecture called the Transformer, which completely eliminates recurrence. Instead, it uses attention mechanisms only to capture dependencies across sequences.

Attention is a mechanism that allows a model to focus on specific parts of the input when producing each part of the output. Instead of treating all input tokens equally, the model weighs them differently depending on what it is trying to produce. Without attention, everything flows sequentially, and important context might fade.

## Background
Prior attempts to reduce sequential computation in models like ByteNet, ConvS2S, and Extended Neural GPU using convolutions still have limitations in capturing long-range dependencies efficiently. On the other hand, self-attention can directly connect all positions in a sequence with constant-time operations and parallelizability, outperforming RNN/CNN methods in both speed and scalability.

## Model Architecture
In sequence transduction, the model has two main components: encoder and decoder. Encoder is like a reader. It takes a sequence of input tokens $$\mathbf{x} = (x_{1}, \cdots, x_{n})$$, processes them to understand the meaning, context, and structure, and outputs a set of vector representation $$\mathbf{z} = (z_{1}, \cdots, z_{n})$$ that summarise the input. Decoder is like a writer. It generates the output sequenc $$\mathbf{y} = (y_{1}, \cdots, y_{m})$$ one token at a time, using the encoder’s output, which is the representation of input's meaning, and its own previous outputs to maintain fluency and grammar.  

Transformer is a encoder-decoder model. Encoder has 6 layers of self-attention (sublayer 1) that captures diverse linguistic features, which are connected to a fully connected feed-forward network (sublayer 2). Around each sublayer, a residucal connection and lyaer normalisation techniques are employed for the stability of training. Just like an encoder, a decoder has sublayer 1 and sublayer 2, but this time, sublayer 1 is masked to make sure the mechanism does not see the future tokens. Furthermore, in between sublayer 1 and sublayer 2, sublayer 3, encoder-decoder attention, is introduced. This sublayer 3 connected the output of the encoder stack with the output of the decoder's sublayer 1. 

